JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we
continue our series
Inside Putin's Russia.
There may be no more
consequential relationship
for the United States
than with Russia.
Both nations possess
world-ending capacity,
and may be at the most
critical moment since
the end of the Cold War.
Tonight, we explore the
bilateral relationship,
the tension and how
Russians see the United
States.
Again in partnership with
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting, special correspondent
Nick Schifrin and producer
Zach Fannin start their report
in Moscow on Victory Day.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On Russia's most
patriotic holiday, Russians
of all ages remember what
they consider their
finest moment.
They mark the anniversary
of victory in World War
II by honoring the dead.
Kiriginov Naimovich's
grandfather fought the Nazis.
He says Russia and the
U.S. were once allies,
and should be again.
KIRIGINOV NAIMOVICH, Russia
(through translator): We really
want to love you and be friends
with you.
We are waiting for you to
finally meet us halfway.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For Russians,
it's the U.S. who's
unwilling to come halfway.
Many here believe President
Trump wants to improve things,
but is being blocked by what
Dimitry Schyukin calls the
American establishment.
DIMITRY SCHYUKIN, Russia
(through translator):
Trump wants to do
something, but he's forced
to follow the general
political line.
ALEXANDER DUGIN, TV Host: Donald
Trump is the most right-wing
candidate of the Republican
Party.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Perhaps
nobody expressed more hope
in Trump than Alexander
Dugin, a right-wing
TV firebrand and philosopher
who's helped inspire
the Kremlin's ideology.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: Really,
we supported Trumpism.
We supported agenda.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dugin says
the Kremlin saw Trump as a
kindred spirit who vowed not to
meddle internationally.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: We
supported this choice
of anti-establishment
conservative American
revolution.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That changed
when President Trump ordered a
missile strike on Russia ally
Syria, and said he
felt must respond to a
chemical weapons attack.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: As long as
America stands for justice, then
peace and harmony will
in the end prevail.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: We trusted not
in Trump as pro-Russian figure.
We trusted in Trump realist.
And we are disappointed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The
disappointment and
tensions have been growing.
Last month, over the Baltic
Sea, a Russian jet flew within
five feet of a U.S. Air Force
reconnaissance plane.
That same week, a NATO
jet shadowed the Russian
defense minister's
plane and a Russian jet
came up and rocked its wings
to demonstrate it was armed.
Last year, the Obama
administration accused
Russia of hacking the
election, and then seized
Russian properties and
increased sanctions.
All of that has led to
Russian frustration.
Maria Zakharova is the
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman.
MARIA ZAKHAROVA, Russian Foreign
Ministry Spokeswoman: We were
trying to establish normal
relationship, normal.
Do you know this word,
normal relationship?
What is wrong with this?
DONALD TRUMP: President Putin
and I have been discussing
various things, and I think it's
going very well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last
week, the U.S. took steps
toward normalization.
Presidents Trump and Putin
announced a deal on Syria.
Both presidents called their
meeting the first step to
warming the relationship.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
If we develop our relations in
the same way, there is every
reason to believe that we would
be able to at least partially
restore the level of
interaction that we need.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The
president echoed that hope.
On Sunday, he tweeted he
wouldn't dwell on 2016 hacking,
and wrote, "Now was the time
to move forward in working
constructively with Russia."
This is not the language other
Trump administration officials
use about Russia on Syria.
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador
to the United Nations: How
many more children have to die
before Russia cares?
NICK SCHIFRIN: On Ukraine.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: We do call on Russia
to exercise influence over
the separatists in the
region, whom they do hold
complete control over.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And
on Putin personally.
MIKE POMPEO, CIA Director:
This is a man for whom veracity
doesn't translate into English.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The one senior
administration official who's
declined to echo that criticism
is Donald Trump, as
candidate and president.
DONALD TRUMP: Wouldn't it
be a great thing if we could
actually get along with Russia?
Wouldn't that be a good thing?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: I respect Putin.
He is a strong leader,
I can tell you that,
unlike what we have.
We have a pathetic leader.
QUESTION: Putin is a killer.
DONALD TRUMP: There
are a lot of killers.
We have a lot of killers.
What, you think our
country is so innocent?
NICK SCHIFRIN: And last
week in Warsaw, President
Trump once again questioned
the U.S. intelligence
community's unanimous
assessment that Russia
hacked the 2016 election.
DONALD TRUMP: I
think it was Russia.
But I think it was probably
other people and/or
countries, and I see
nothing wrong with that
statement.
Nobody really knows.
SEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia:
At the very least, giving the
president all the benefit of the
doubt, this is very
bizarre behavior.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Democratic
Senator Mark Warner is
the vice chairman of
the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: We are seeking
to determine if there is an
actual fire, but there's clearly
a lot of smoke.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Warner is helping
lead the Senate's investigation
into Russia's interference
in the 2016 election and
whether President Trump or his
campaign colluded with Russia's
attempts to sway the election.
We first interviewed
him three weeks ago.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: It is very strange
that any presidential candidate,
and in particular a Republican
presidential candidate,
would parrot so much
of the Russian line.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Republican
Senator James Lankford is also
on the Intelligence Committee.
In some ways, has President
Trump aligned himself with the
ideals expressed by Russia?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD (R),
Oklahoma: Yes, he's
pushing out some messages
that are consistent with
the Kremlin policies.
And I would tell you, at every
opportunity that I have, I
try to articulate very clearly
there's no question that the
Russians were trying to hack
into our elections, and there's
no question that we should
have a strong NATO and that the
United States should be a part
of that NATO alliance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Do you
believe that he's not
echoing that because the
Russians have compromising
material on him?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I don't know.
I hope not.
But the goal of this
investigation is to not
only reconfirm Russian
intervention and explain
that to the American public,
but to also see if there were
any contacts between the Trump
campaign and the Russians.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And just this
week, we learned that, last
June, Donald Trump Jr. met with
lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya
and lobbyist Rinat Akhmetshin,
both believed to have ties
to the Russian government.
I spoke to Senator
Warner again last night.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: This indication
that they were willing to accept
this information from Russians
and it was part of an overall
Russian government effort to
help Trump and to hurt Clinton,
I think this is the first
time the American public has
seen that in black and white.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Much of this
town has been worried about
Trump and Russia since he became
president.
Current administration officials
tell "NewsHour" the White House
drafted an executive order
that would have lifted sanctions
imposed on Russia over Ukraine.
Senior administration officials
and the intelligence community
successfully lobbied against it.
And, this spring,
senators passed a bill
that would restrict the
president's ability to
lift those sanctions.
The bill's not yet a law,
but it was designed to
be a nearly unanimous
message to the president
and to Putin.
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: We
believe strongly that
what Russia continues to
do to be able to threaten
Ukraine, threaten its neighbors,
threaten NATO, to continue
to pry into not only our
elections, but other
elections, is destabilizing,
and it demands a response.
They have yet to have a
consequence to what they
did in the election time.
And they should.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In some ways, the
president has fallen in line.
On Sunday, he tweeted he
wouldn't lift sanctions
on Russia over Ukraine
until Ukrainian and
Syrian problems are solved.
And last week, he also
endorsed Article 5,
NATO's collective defense.
DONALD TRUMP: The United States
has demonstrated not merely with
words, but with its actions,
that we stand firmly
behind Article 5, the
mutual defense commitment.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That convinces
many in Moscow that the U.S.
establishment is making sure
the U.S. remains anti-Russian.
Dmitri Trenin is a former Soviet
army colonel who directs the
Carnegie Center in Moscow.
DMITRI TRENIN, Former Soviet
Army Colonel: The United States
has been, remains, and will
be the power that defines common
Western, i.e., U.S.-driven,
foreign, defense and security
policy.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And given that,
Trenin says the U.S. remains
Russia's main adversary.
And Russia is simply
targeting the U.S. with
whatever tool it can.
DMITRI TRENIN: I'm sure that
the Russians have been looking
at things, have been hacking
things, have been using the
material that they have hacked.
Why are you surprised
that you are being hacked?
This is a method of espionage.
This is what you do.
If you can do it, do it.
If you can protect against
that, protect against
it, but don't whine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But it
goes one step further.
Many in Russia look at
Washington's turbulence
and see a U.S. they'd
considered strong and
unified suddenly weakened.
And they're exploiting that
weakness in the U.S. foundation.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: It
is not so coherent.
It is not so stable.
And it is vulnerable,
I would say.
And we seen that.
We have seen what we needed
to see, vulnerability
of American society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Nick
now joins me in our studio.
So, Nick, that sounds
pretty foreboding.
NICK SCHIFRIN: I think it should
sound foreboding, because it is.
I think usual Russians really do
see a vulnerability in the U.S.
They see a lack of unity.
And when talking frankly to
people who actually know what
they're talking about in Russia,
it's not so much denial
that they did it.
It is that we did it in the
United States last year,
and we will keep doing it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, from talking
to them, is there any doubt
that they are going to keep
on doing it?
NICK SCHIFRIN: No, I don't think
so, mostly because they don't
feel like they paid a price.
The Russian government doesn't
feel like the United States
government really penalized
them for what
happened last year.
And, frankly, a lot of
American officials here in
Washington agree with that.
They fault the Obama
administration and the
Trump administration
for simply not following
through on some of the things
that they feel like Russia
should have paid for what they
did last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you and I
talked a little bit about this.
You talked to so many experts.
Is there hope?
Is there a glimmer of
a belief anywhere that
this can be repaired?
NICK SCHIFRIN: There
are analysts in Moscow
who think the only thing
we can hope is that
we avoid war.
I mean, there are some people
who are that dire right now.
I think the people who are
trying to make it better and
hope it can make it better are
doing what basically President
Trump and Putin did earlier in
that story we showed, trying
to find a lowest common
denominator, if you will, trying
to find a corner of Syria, for
example, where they can work
together and use that very
small deal to expand perhaps
into greater Syria, to
expand into a kind of
warming of the relationship.
And certainly the people
who understand that
this relationship has
to get better, that's
what they're trying to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, looking for
places to make that happen.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nick
Schifrin, thank you.
It is a remarkable series.
Thank you very much.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thanks very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you call
watch all of Nick's reports from
this week's series on our Web
site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.